Title: New Setup (I moved to Pelican)
Date: 2018-01-04
Tags: Meta, CS


Can you spot something new ?

I decided last week that I wanted to use Pelican for building my blog
instead of Jekyll. I have just switched in the last two days and this
is the first post that I am writing from the Pelican built site.

There are a lot of reasons why I switched to [Pelican](https://blog.getpelican.com/) from Jekyll.

- I want to use GUIX SD as my primary Operating System instead of arch and Jekyll is not available on GUIX SD.
- I am more comfortable with Python rather than Ruby
- Jekyll build time increases as the number of posts increase
- Pelican offers the true `themes` experience instead of Jekyll. 
- Pelican takes care of a lot of things for me (like atom feed generation, pagination etc)
- Pelican plugins are easier to understand and maintain
- There is no weird `bundle ...` mess anywhere. Everything is self contained.
- Pelican is better than Jekyll
- Emacs has a pelican mode (oh yeah!! I use emacs!!)

So this is probably one of the biggest changes that has happened to this blog. 
Apart form this there have been a number of smaller changes to this blog.

- The license has changed from a Creative Commons
  Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License to a
  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International License.
- I removed the Navigation links from the top of the blog to the bottom
- I have a better footer on this blog than the previous one
- The "publishing a post" workflow is a bit complicated than a Jekyll hosted site
- I also removed some of the Signal and Sohom weirdness from the about page.


So that's about it...
