Title: My Setup
Date: 2021-11-21
Tags: Tech
Summary: A live-record of all the hardware and software that I own and use.
Status: Draft

# Hardware 21-11-2021
## Computers
- 1 x Raspberry Pi Model 4 8GB
- 1 x Lenovo ThinkPad L14 (i5-10210U / 16GB / 256GB SSD) (Office laptop)
- 1 x Google Pixel 4a (128 GB)

My previous work laptop was pretty okay to use. There were not much limitations on it. This current laptop has a lot of restrictions on it. I think I will need to buy a personal computer soon.

The Pixel is the first expensive phone that I've purchased new. The last OnePlus3 which I bought from a colleague is still there, but it's screen needs replacing. I will probably use it for mapping when Im out trekking or riding.

I am running Ubuntu of both my computers. I do not have a choice on the work laptop, and on the Raspberry-Pi I choose to run it because its quite stable and nice. Also, packages are readily available for it. I do not use any Tiling Window manager.

## Display
- 1 x Philips 246E FHD monitor

This was the cheapest display that I could afford which supported the full sRGB color space and is VESA mount compatible. I do not think that I would enjoy a multi-monitor setup, maybe a single large monitor.vvv

## Networking Gear
- 1 x NetGear Nighthawk AC6580 router

A powerful router that supports open-wrt and is relatively powerful enough for Gigabit transfers in the local network. This is not my primary router as I am still at home where I use the family Wi-fi router (which is not as powerful).

Once im back on my own, this will be a primary router.

TODO. A multi-wan load balancing switch. Maybe something with VPN capabilities. :-p

## Storage
- 1 x Seagate Backup Plus Portable Drive (5TB)
- 1 x Seagate Backup Plus Portable Drive (2TB)
- 1 x Toshiba Cavio (1TB)

The Toshiba cavio disk was donated by a friend.
The Seagate 5TB drive is the primary disk for RRusty.
The Seagate 2TB drive is for off-site backups.

## Camera and stuff
- 1 x Canon EOS-700D
- 1 x Canon EFS 18-55mm f3.5/5.6 Lens

A used 700D fits perfectly for my uses. It was also cheap enough. I bought this specifically because this could run MagicLantern, but then realized that I do not need to run MagicLantern. :p

Apart from that the Lens is also OK for my use-case. After all, this is just a hobby and maybe for digitizing books. Nothing that requires a lot of horse-power.

## Audio
- 1x Audio Technica ATH-M40x

A very durable pair of headphones which is also very very comfortable. The stock earpads were not as comfy, but after i ripped the top layer of the PU cover, these are very very comfy.

## Bicycles
- 1 x Merida Crossway 20-MD
- 1 Btwin MyBike (Medium size)

The Crossway is another used hardware piece I own. Its nice and it was priced perfectly for my budget. I mainly use it for commuting and some (very occasional) long distance rides.

The Btwin MyBike is a very simple, no bells and whistles bicycle that I bought to keep at my home in Kolkata. This will be used when I return home occasionally. In my absence a friend promised that they will happily look after the bike.

## Misc
- 1 x Transcend powered USB-Hub
- 1 x Kindle PaperWhite 10th Gen

The powered USB 3.1 Hub works really well with the Raspberry Pi. It does not backfeed the USB lines with power. At the same time, it allows me to run pto 4 HDDs from the RPi.
## What Software do I use ?
Primary OS is Ubuntu 20.04 both of the work laptop and on RRusty.
The work laptop is basic vanilla config with no bells and whistles; though I have disabled snaps.
