Title:
Date: 2021-11-21
Tags: Meta, Personal

# Fear of Failure and Learning in Public
- ever since i can remember, i was very afraid of appearing to be stupid in public. This manifested itself in not asking questinos in classes (and then googling them later on (when google was available)) etc etc
- I always wanted people to see the final outcome. A WIP was a failure to me.
- I often abandonned projects because they looked un-finished
- turns out that all of this is quite bad for mental health and for leaning in general.
- I am turning a new leaf. I will document what ever I am learning as I am learning them (I do this for my future self)
- I will be  working on half-finished projects in the public
- The main inspiration for this were a bunch of people who I admire ... share their half-finished projects.
- I mean. people do have a life and they do not always need to work on their projects.
# Agency and Friendships and Surprises
- I like agency a lot
- i want to take my own decisions etc.
- because of not wanting to be seen as a failure, i would often engage in activities that I could do alone. This makes me very good at staying alone for large periods of time. This also makes me a very bad roommate.
- I do not want my friends (or anyone) to protect me form things that they think will be bad for me. A classic example is when my friends prevented (or rather confronted me) for participating in a local ceremony because in their minds, i just wasnt the kind of gyu who did that sort of thing. They were right. i was not. But on that day, i was willing to make an exception. They could not understand that.
- I want to make mistakes.
- I am not an idiot. I know when certain things are too risky to be tried for the sake of "making my own mistakes".
- This is also why i do not like surprises and gifts. I do not like owning stuff and I spend a lot of time thinking about what i would buy (there is a rather unhealthy amount of thingking and analysis that goes into any purchase i make ( i really need to optimize how im spending my money)). a gift feels like a decision that someone else has made for you. I am still grateful that. And most people buy things that they would want me to have, rather than somehting that i would like to have. Every gift to me, feels like someone gifting me a dog or a cat for a pet.
- I also read movie plots before watching them. I do not like surprises


# my open projects
## RRusty
## KNowledge base