Title: Anti-Blog (and other updates)
Date: 2022-08-01
Tags: Tech
Summary: A couple of updates about how I am planning to use this site from now.
Status: Draft

For a while I was very dissatissfied with how I read and write stuff.
The entire system that I had built on top of Emacs is gone as of now. A LOT of things have changed.

This is the logical continuation of that train of thought.


I have always struggled with the question of how I can add new material to older blogs.
I also felt that it was pointless to maintain two sets of notes; one more detailed for myself and one less detailed for the blog. A LOT of the material was shared and it felt extremely pointless.

The goals that I have for this new system and this site is this.

- Single source of truth for articles.
    - A single file will hold all the data about a topic. The goal is for me to be able to read it later.
    - This is a dump of things I know and How i know them.
    - This should be visible from the blog as well as the github repo with any decent markdown viewer. This is non-negotiable because I need to be able to not use the brower to look at my "notes"
    - I will update things on my "notes" as and when I learn new things. I do not need to feel guilty about updating the date etc. etc. 
    - These will be for things tagged as "notes"
    - For other things, it will have the normal blog type things.

Other things:
- Im shifting all the "tracking" to CSV files that work on google-docs and calc.
- This includes things like books, movies and reading list etc etc.
- Lets not reinvent the wheel when it comes to spreadsheets.

