Title: My Setup
Date: 2022-07-18
Tags: Tech
Summary: A live-record of all the hardware and software that I own and use.

# Computers
- 1 x Raspberry Pi Model 4 8GB
- 1 x Lenovo ThinkPad L14 (i5-10210U / 16GB / 256GB SSD) (Office laptop)
- 1 x Lenovo ThinkPad L14 (Ryzen7 Pro-5850U / 16GB / 512GB) (Personal workhorse)
- 1 x Google Pixel 4a (128 GB)

My previous work laptop was pretty okay to use. There were not much limitations on it. This current laptop has a lot of restrictions on it. I think I will need to buy a personal computer soon.

The Pixel is the first expensive phone that I've purchased new. The last OnePlus3 which I bought from a colleague is still there, but it's screen needs replacing. I will probably use it for mapping when Im out trekking or riding.

I am running Ubuntu of both my computers. I do not have a choice on the work laptop, and on the Raspberry-Pi I choose to run it because its quite stable and nice. Also, packages are readily available for it. I do not use any Tiling Window manager.

# Display
- 1 x Philips 246E FHD monitor

This was the cheapest display that I could afford which supported the full sRGB color space and is VESA mount compatible. I do not think that I would enjoy a multi-monitor setup, maybe a single large monitor.

# Networking Gear
- 1 x NetGear Nighthawk AC6580 router

A powerful router that supports open-wrt and is relatively powerful enough for Gigabit transfers in the local network. This is not my primary router as I am still at home where I use the family Wi-fi router (which is not as powerful).

Once im back on my own, this will be a primary router.

TODO. A multi-wan load balancing switch. Maybe something with VPN capabilities. :-p

# Storage
- 1 x Seagate Backup Plus Portable Drive (5TB)
- 1 x Seagate Backup Plus Portable Drive (2TB)
- 1 x Toshiba Cavio (1TB)

The Toshiba cavio disk was donated by a friend.
The Seagate 5TB drive is the primary disk for RRusty.
The Seagate 2TB drive is for off-site backups.

# Camera and stuff
- 1 x Canon EOS-700D
- 1 x Canon EFS 18-55mm f3.5/5.6 Lens

A used 700D fits perfectly for my uses. It was also cheap enough. I bought this specifically because this could run MagicLantern, but then realized that I do not need to run MagicLantern. :p

Apart from that the Lens is also OK for my use-case. After all, this is just a hobby and maybe for digitizing books. Nothing that requires a lot of horse-power.

# Audio
- 1x Audio Technica ATH-M40x

A very durable pair of headphones which is also very very comfortable. The stock earpads were not as comfortable as they used to get hot inside the earpads after long hours of usage. However, once the top layer of the earpads started to get ripped out these are very very comfy. Once I buy a new pair of earpads, I will go for the breathable ones.

# Bicycles
- 1 Btwin MyBike (Medium size)

The Btwin MyBike is a very simple bike. It is a very _no-bs_ bicycle. This bicycle will stay at home home in Kolkata. In my absence a friend promised that they will happily look after the bike. Otherwise, the bike is simple enough that there aren't enough things to go wrong. It is pretty bullet-proof from that perspective.

# Misc
- 1 x Transcend powered USB-Hub

The powered USB 3.1 Hub works really well with the Raspberry Pi. It does not backfeed the USB lines with power. At the same time, it allows me to run pto 4 HDDs from the RPi.


## What Software do I use ?
Primary OS is Ubuntu 20.04 both of the work laptop and on RRusty.

The work laptop is basic vanilla config with no bells and whistles; though I have disabled snaps.

# What I used to own ?
### Bicycle
I had a `Merida Crossway 20-MD` which I bought used in Mumbai. I used it quite a bit in Mumbai, but then when the pandemic began, I left it with a friend of mine. My friend ended up buying the bicycle as she had fallen in love with it. :)
### Kindle
I do not read enough books on the Kindle for me to own it. Most of my reading is done on my android phone. [The Book Plan](2019-08-04-The-Book-System.md) failed.



